There's been some debate on unit testing repositories,
namely around the concept of a unit test.
Some advocate that you should test your repository with a mock data source.
The reason for this is that a true unit test should only exercise
the class that you're testing and introducing a database makes the
test more of an integration test.
While this line of reasoning is solid,
the usefulness of these tests is questionable.
With a mock data source,
you can determine if the repository is making the correct
calls with the correct SQL statements,
but you cannot tell if the database persistence is actually working.
The alternative approach is to test the repository
against the mock or test database.
In this approach,
we create a test configuration that creates our data source for us,
and then use that data source to test with our repository.
For this example, we're going to opt for the latter approach.
The reason for this is that we really want to test our
SQL code to ensure that it's correct,
and catch errors in the SQL if the code changes in the future.
For example, we may optimize the SQL in the future,
but we really want to make sure that it continues to return the correct results.
In order to test our application against a test database,
we need to create a new configuration class,
which will reside in our test code in src/test/java
that creates a new test dataSource.
This class looks very similar to other Spring configuration
classes in that it's annotated with the Configuration
annotation and defines methods that create resources that are
annotated with the Bean annotation.
The only two things that are different about this configuration are first,
the class is annotated with the Profile test annotation.
Spring allows us to define profiles to limit the scope of our configurations.
In our case, the test class will be annotated with test in its active profiles,
whereas our production repository will not; therefore,
our test class will use this test dataSource,
and when the application runs in production,
it won't.
The DataSource Bean that we're defining is annotated with Primary.
This annotation tells Spring that when this configuration is used,
that this bean should override any other beans of the same type,
and hence be the primary.
When running a production, we won't load this configuration,
but when running in test,
Spring will automatically create this DataSource for our test instance.
DbUnit provides database functionality for our unit tests.
First, it will set up our database using a YAML or other configuration file,
and then it will erase the database and refresh it from
the YAML file before running every test.
This enables us to work against a known set of data and to be sure that our
unit tests have a consistent set of data every time they run.
The products.yml file creates 2 products, Product 1 and Product 2.
Because this file is a YAML file,
the dashes and tabbing are required to match what you see on the screen.
Essentially, using this script,
you can define as many products as you would like with
whatever attributes you would like.
Furthermore, if we had more tables,
we could define their entries in the same YAML file.
The file itself is stored in src/test/resources/datasets,
where the DbUnit extension will find it.
When we build our test method,
we leverage the DataSet annotation and reference the YAML file.
DbUnit Extension will retrieve this file and use it to populate the database.
Let's dive into the code.
First, we're going to review the test setup requirements,
including the test configuration class and the product.yml file,
and then we're going to review the set of unit
tests and understand how they work.
Let's begin by looking at the ProductRepositoryTestConfiguration file.
This class is annotated with Spring's Configuration annotation,
which identifies this as a Spring configuration class,
and with the Profile test annotation,
which tells Spring to only use this configuration for classes
that have test in their active profiles.
This class contains a single method, DataSource,
which creates a new H2 dataSource instance.
It's annotated with the Bean annotation,
which means that Spring will use it to create a Spring-managed bean,
and the Primary annotation,
which means that it will override any other bean of this type,
but only for the test profile.
Now let's look at the product.yml file.
This file is located in the src/test/
resources/datasets folder and creates two products.
You're free to create more products,
or even create other database tables; furthermore,
if the tests are more comprehensive,
you're free to create multiple YAML files and import different
YAML files for different test scenarios.
Now let's look at the ProductRepositoryTest class.
This class is annotated with three annotations.
The ExtendWith annotation specifies two extensions,
Spring extension, and DBUnitExtension.
You're already familiar with the Spring extension.
It uses JUnit 5 lifecycle notifications to manage
the Spring application context.
The DBUnitExtension uses Spring 5 lifecycle notifications to
manage the database under test; specifically,
it will erase and rebuild a database between test method executions so that
we'll always have a known set of good data to test with.
The SpringBootTest annotation scans the class path and creates a
Spring application context for use in this test.
And the ActiveProfiles is used to tell Spring what
profiles are active for this test.
Specifying that we're using the test profile enables us to use the
ProductRepositoryTest configurations version of the H2 dataSource.
We have Autowired into the ProductRepositoryTest our DataSource bean,
as well as the ProductRepository that we're going to test.
In order for the DBUnitExtension to manage our DataSource,
we need to provide a method named getConnectionHolder that provides a
function that generates connections to our database.
We return a simple lambda expression that returns a
connection from our dataSource.
The first test we want to look at is testFindAll.
Like all tests, it's annotated with the JUnit 5 Test annotation,
but it also includes the DataSet annotation.
The DataSet annotation specifies a comma-separated list of
datasets to load before executing the test case.
In this example, we have a single dataset,
which is loaded from the products.yml file that we saw earlier.
Let's take a quick look at the DataSet annotation so that
you can see the options available to you.
Some of the interesting values include the value,
which contains the dataset to load or a
comma-separated list of datasets to load,
the strategy, which defines the SeedStrategy for the dataset.
We left this as its default value of CLEAN_INSERT,
which means that DbUnit will clean and then insert data from the
specified datasets into the database tables.
Other SeedStrategy values include INSERT,
which inserts the data from the dataset into the database tables.
In this case, existing rows are left unaffected.
REFRESH, which executes updates for matching rows in the dataset,
inserts missing rows, and leaves existing rows unaffected.
And UPDATE, which updates existing rows in the dataset,
but if the dataset contains new rows, then it throws an exception.
CLEAN_INSERT makes things cleaner for us because we can control every
row that is in the database when our tests run.
If we opted for an update or a refresh strategy and one of
our tests inserted a row into the database,
then the order in which test runs could affect the results; for example,
our testFindAll method tests the number of records returned by the repository.
If it's the first test to run, then it would find two rows,
but if any of the insert tests ran first,
then the number of returned rows would not be deterministic
and could inadvertently break our test case.
CLEAN_INSERT is the most expensive strategy,
but depending on your test case, it's also the safest.
Other interesting configuration options are,
executeStatementsBefore, executeStatementsAfter,
executeScriptsBefore, and executeScriptsAfter.
In short,
the dataset gives you complete control of how your database will
look both before and after a test case runs.
Getting back to our testFindAll test case,
we know that the database will have two products
defined in the products.yml file,
so we can execute a findAll on our repository and validate
that we do in fact get two products back.
The next test method is testFindByIdSuccess.
The database is initialized with the two products from the products.yml file,
1 with an ID of 1 and 1 with an ID 2, so we can query for the product with ID 2.
This test finds the product with ID 2, asserts that it's present,
and then validates all of the products fields.
The testFindByIdNotFound method performs the same steps,
but queries for the product with ID 3, which doesn't exist.
It then validates the product is not present.
The testSave method creates a new Product and saves it to the
database by executing the repository's save method.
It then validates that the returned product is correct,
and then it queries the database for the product with the
saved products ID and validates its fields.
The testUpdateSuccess method tests a successful update.
It creates a new product with ID 1, but with different values.
It executes the repository's update method,
asserts that the update returns true,
and then it retrieves the product from the database and validates
that the fields have been updated correctly.
The testUpdateFailure method attempts to update a
product that's not in the database.
It creates a new product with ID 3,
and then executes the repository's update method.
Because the database does not contain a product with ID 3,
the update will fail and and the update method will return false.
The testDeleteSuccess method deletes the product with ID 1,
validates that the delete method returns true,
and then queries for the product with ID 1 and validates that
it's no longer present in the database.
Finally,
the testDeleteFailure method attempts to delete a product
that does not exist in the database.
It executes the delete with ID 3, which doesn't exist,
and then validates that the delete method returns false.
Resetting the database to a known good state between test runs
helps us write unit tests because we can be confident that we will always receive the data that we expect.